Good morning, Menlo Church.
It is so good to be with you today.
Whether you're watching online or in person right now at our Saratoga San Mateo Mountain View or Menlo Park Campus, wherever you're tuning in from, you are right where you need to be.
Now, if it's been a while since you've been in church, I want you to know that you're welcome here.
We're in week three of a message series titled, I Am the God Who Gets Close.
And each week we've looked at stories from scripture and found significance in the timeless truths that they represent, each one giving us a glimpse of who God is and how He is near to us in mysterious and unexpected ways.
Now, Hollywood has explored this idea before, and while these characters might be humorous or clever, maybe a little aloof, these depictions almost always have one thing in common.
They leave me wanting for more.
More answers, more clarity, more understanding.
Maybe the same is true for you today.
Maybe you're curious or charmed by the idea or concept of God, but you don't really know him, and you don't really feel like there's a way to because the idea of God being close to us
Is it really compatible with any of our physical senses?
In week one, we talked about God speaking to Moses in the desert through a burning bush.
In week two, we talked about God appearing in a physical form to wrestle with Jacob.
And today, you're gonna hear another unbelievable story from ancient literature.
And if you're here thinking, that sounds fun, but as far as I know, nothing like that happens anymore.
And I have to go to work tomorrow.
So are you gonna say something that's actually connected back to the real world?
And I would say, yes.
And for the next 30 minutes, I'd ask that you suspend your disbelief, not as an act of compliance, but as a step away from cynicism.
Because when we dismiss something too quickly, we might miss something valuable in the process.
In college, I would do some odd jobs for extra money.
And I got introduced to a gentleman who was an expert on horticulture.
He was a plant aficionado.
This guy had plants inside and outside the house.
And he hired me to help organize this collection and do some gardening.
And so I spent weeks there from the spring into the summer.
And I distinctly remember this.
It was a warm day.
I was working cleaning up one of the garden beds when he walks up to me and asks me if I'd seen a particular plant and he hands me a Polaroid of it.
And yes, I had definitely seen it.
I had just violently torn it out of the garden bed and thrown it at a very large pile at the bottom of a very large pile of mulching debris.
It doesn't say a word, it just takes off running towards the pile.
So we get over there, we start digging and there it is.
This pale, green, fragile looking plant crushed limp buried under everything that I had decided was disposable.
And so he gently lifts it up, almost cradling it.
And he says to me, I bought this for $60.
To which I thought, OK, that's not so bad.
I can cover that.
And then he said, in Mexico, in 1975, fully grown, it's worth $8,000.
To which I asked,
So is it okay now?
And he said with an edge to his voice, yes, it will be, but it didn't deserve to be tossed.
And I have never forgotten that moment because sometimes we discard or dismiss things, not because they lack value, but because we don't recognize the value of it.
And so today I would just humbly ask if you are tending to the garden of your soul, move slowly and deliberately.
Don't rush to discard things because of how they look or sound.
I believe that God is a lot closer than we think and there might be something very close and very valuable for each of us today and I wouldn't want us to miss that.
We pray with me.
God, thank you for the examples we have in the real world loaded with wisdom and opportunity invitation to learn from you and from the Scriptures.
And so today, God, I just ask for each and every single one of us who are here today, would you speak to us?
Would you reveal your presence to us?
Would you show us how you are close in every step of our lives?
In Jesus' name, amen.
So lately, as a personal practice, I've been taking inventory of the things that I've been carrying.
And I don't mean it a physical way, but in a way that acknowledges what's troubling me or saddening me or what I'm afraid of.
Now, the first two usually apply to things that have already happened, but what we're afraid of, that is something different.
When we're faced with danger, sometimes the body reacts quicker physically than the mind can process.
You've seen this before in the Discovery Channel, when a predator goes after the prey and the twitch fiber muscles are activated and the prey snaps into action and they take off running.
Like I sometimes wonder,
The prey does happen to manage to make it to safety.
They go to animal therapy afterwards.
They get the herd together and talk about it because I just think that might be helpful.
If I was a wildebeest, I'd probably live in a state of perpetual PTSD.
I think when we're under pressure or danger, we look for something safe.
But who or what can you trust in besides yourself when you're actually in danger?
We have a lot to contend with, decisions we need to make personally or professionally, broken relationships with family or significant others, uncertain futures and the silent fears that we carry but rarely name.
And there are moments in our lives where that pressure feels dangerous, moments where the cost of saying no might feel too high, moments where the easier path would be to just not along.
Moments where keeping your conviction might cost you comfort or reputation or opportunity or approval.
And here's a deeper layer.
Those moments don't just test what we do, they test what we believe.
Scripture defines faith as the substance of things hoped for, but what happens when your hope is threatened?
What happens when the thing you were counting on starts to shake, when the relationship falters, or the job feels unstable, where the future feels uncertain?
Faith sounds beautiful in theory, but
It's fractured without hope.
And so today I ask you, what are the things spoken or unspoken that you were in the middle of right now?
Where have you lost hope?
What are the pressures or perils in your life?
I really want you to take a second and think about that.
You got it?
Good.
And I want to invite you to consider this idea that the existence and presence of God does not eliminate danger.
but it changes what the danger can do to you.
Another way to say that is God's presence transforms our peril.
Today's story comes to us from the book of Daniel in the Bible.
It takes place around 600 BC.
Israel has been conquered by the Babylonian Empire, the city of Jerusalem has fallen, and the temple, the physical place where they worship God has been destroyed.
The Babylonian Empire had a system for subduing the kingdoms that they had conquered.
They would allow some of the citizens to remain in the city and continue to work and contribute, but under the empire's rule and taxation.
However, they would take a majority of the citizens, particularly the best and brightest or most notable or powerful public figures, and they would send them 500 miles away to the capital city in Babylon.
They'd educate them, they'd train them, they'd teach them the customs and religions of the empire, and then they would send some of them back into their home cities.
And eventually, over time, the entire culture of the conquered would just assimilate.
They'd no longer have a distinct identity.
They'd just forget who they were, and they'd adopt the ideas and beliefs of their captors.
And so among the young leaders selected for Babylon's elite training program are four young men, Daniel, Hananiah,
Michel and Azariah.
However, as part of the assimilation process and in an effort to erase their identities, these boys were given new names.
Daniel becomes Belchazar, Hannoniah becomes Shadrach, Michel becomes Meshach, and Azaria becomes Love Shack.
I'm just making sure you're paying attention.
If you think dad jokes are bad, I can assure you, pastor dad jokes are so much worse.
So Azaria becomes a bed to go, but that seems like a missed opportunity.
So these boys, they are all elevated to high positions in court.
And even though they're young, they're sharp, they become royal advisors to the king.
Their Hebrew names have been stripped from them because those names pointed to Yahweh.
Their Babylonian names pointed to Babylonian gods.
That's their culture telling them, forget who you were.
This is who you are.
But they didn't.
They may have been serving the empire, but they never forgot who they were or who they worshiped.
They didn't retreat or try to escape, but they also didn't fully assimilate.
Despite the pressure around them, they balanced with conviction the tension of their surroundings with the significance of their calling.
They learned to live faithfully without being combated.
They learned how to serve their city without surrendering their souls.
They contributed to the empire, but they did not confuse the empire with God.
And that tension, how to live with conviction,
in a culture that doesn't share your allegiance is not an ancient problem.
That's a current one.
A few years before the conquest of Israel, God had sent prophets in to warn the city that they were at risk because of their sin and that a day would come where God would permit them to fall into peril, but God gave them this instruction through a prophet named Jeremiah saying to them, seek the welfare of the city where I have sent you into exile and pray to the Lord on its behalf for in its welfare,
you will find your welfare.
And that's exactly what the boys continued to do.
They kept serving, they kept giving, they kept contributing.
And it was good until it wasn't.
Enter King Nebuchadnezzar, a successful but extremely temperamental and self-aggrandizing leader who is plagued by a lot of fear and a lot of insecurity.
King Nebuchadnezzar often has these dreams where envisions.
He wakes up and then he demands that those around him explain what they meant.
And if he doesn't like the answer, those people never get to say another word again.
He suffers from both an inferiority and superiority complex at the same time.
He is a dangerous leader and he makes the world a dangerous place around him.
The issue with King Nebuchadnezzar isn't just that he's powerful, is that he's afraid.
Afraid of losing control, afraid of losing influence, afraid of being forgotten, and when fear sits on the throne of our lives, it rarely stays quiet.
Unmanaged irrational anxiety almost always leads to aggression.
And when leaders are threatened, they don't just seek comfort, they seek compliance, usually at the expense of others.
But in spite of this,
The boys are continuing to serve consistently and faithfully under the King's rule.
Daniel is promoted to a ruler over a province of the kingdom and Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.
They helped to oversee the affairs of the city.
They had faith in God's presence and promise despite their circumstances.
But the pressure is building and what started as a quiet assimilation is about to become a public test of allegiance.
So Nebuchadnezzar builds a 90-foot tall monument made of gold in a public place.
And it's supposed to be an attestation to the success of Babylon, meant to represent all the achievement of the empire, all the gods that have blessed its success.
And then he issues a royal decree that at various times throughout the day, music will be played.
And if you hear it, you must step away from everything that you're doing.
You have to fall to the ground and worship the monument.
I think this was basically like the BC version of Burning Man.
Except attendance was mandatory and dissent was fatal.
So way less relaxed.
And we may not bow to gold statues in Silicon Valley, but we bow.
We bow to performance.
We bow to platforms.
We bow to productivity or portfolios.
We bow to whatever promises us security.
Whatever tells us, if you give me your time and your attention, I'll keep you safe and I'll make you successful.
And that's exactly the sort of pressure we live under.
We want safety.
We want assurance.
We want hope that it's all going to be okay in anything that can give us a glimpse of that might be worth it.
So giving in sometimes just feels rational.
Have you ever heard yourself saying to yourself, just this once, don't make it awkward.
It's not worth the risk.
Everybody's doing it.
Where have you rationalized your choices while under pressure?
Because that's how assimilation starts, not by intimidation, but by affirmation.
By making you believe that it's not a big deal.
The scholars around this Babylon-Israel dichotomy here, they don't believe that the people living in exile had to renounce their beliefs completely.
They just had to practice it in addition to everything else.
And when it comes to faith,
All pluralistic societies have the same rules from Babylon to the Bay Area.
You can believe whatever you want, as long as you also believe everything else.
So giving in under pressure when it challenges your convictions isn't just survival, it's surrendering to your surroundings because you can't, your hope can't compete with your circumstances.
But Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego didn't believe that.
And it was only a matter of time before their refusal became visible because allegiance is always obvious when everybody else bows.
and eventually they get reported to the king.
This is Daniel chapter three verse 13.
Furious with rage, Nebuchadnezzar summoned Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
So these men were brought before the king and Nebuchadnezzar said to them, is it true Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego that you do not serve my gods or worship the image of gold that I have set up?
Now, when you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp,
pipe, kazoo, and all kinds of music.
If you are ready to fall down and worship the image I made, very good.
But if you do not worship it, you will be thrown immediately into a blazing furnace.
Then what God will be able to rescue you from my hand.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego replied to him, King Nebuchadnezzar, we do not need to defend ourselves before you in this matter.
If we are thrown into the blazing furnace, the God we serve is able to deliver us from it.
And he will deliver us from your majesty's hands.
But even if he does not, we want you to know your majesty that we will not serve your gods or worship the image of gold you have set up.
So even with the threat of death by fire and the furnace, the boys do not give in.
Now I know scripture refers to Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego as men, but just keep in mind in a culture that named you an adult by 13, they were likely teenagers.
And with all the self-assertion that only cocky defiant teenagers can truly deliver, they tell the king, we don't need to defend ourselves to you, our God is able to deliver us.
And notice what they don't say.
They don't say that God will definitely deliver them.
They say, but even if he does not, we will not serve your gods.
They might be young, but this is one of the most mature statements of faith in all of Scripture.
It's not bravado, it's not spiritual hype, it's just clarity.
Our God is able, but even if he does not, we will not bow.
This is what happens when assimilation meets dedication.
The voice trusted in the presence of God, and now we're about to see what happens when things move from pressure to peril.
Because up until now, this has been a story about public loyalty and private conviction.
about assimilation and identity, about music and monuments and the subtle nature of going along to get along.
But now the king stops playing games and he gives them a direct ultimatum.
You can bow or you can burn.
And it's easy for us to look at a story like this now and think, well, of course, it didn't bow.
That's just what heroes do.
But that's only because we know that something's going to happen here, right?
We know that there's another end to this story, that there's a rescue, that there's a miracle, that there's another in the fire.
But they didn't know that.
All they knew in the moment was the furnace is real.
When we face peril in our own lives, it has a way of clarifying what's actually inside us.
You don't always know what you trust until what you're trusting in gets threatened.
You don't always know what you believe until belief actually costs you something.
You don't always know what's holding you up until the bottom falls out.
A great poet of our time once said, everybody has a plan until they get punched in the face.
And that's funny, until it's not.
Because most of us live with a plan for our life, for our family, for our career, for how things are supposed to go, and then a phone call comes in.
A diagnosis happens, a betrayal comes, a layoff comes, a headline comes, a season of life that you didn't schedule and you can't control, and suddenly, it's not theoretical anymore.
That's peril.
And here's what makes peril so disorienting.
Peril doesn't just threaten your comfort.
It threatens your sense of meaning.
It doesn't just shake your schedule.
It shakes your soul.
That's why I just want to slow down here for a moment because we live in a world where peril is not rare.
It's not hypothetical.
It's not some bronze age problem.
The world is a dangerous place right now.
Maybe not necessarily in the same way.
There's no furnace in the town square, but dangerous in the sense that so much can change so quickly.
A nation can shift in a week, a market can turn in a day, a relationship can collapse with a sentence, your body or your mind can betray you overnight, and you can do everything right and still find yourself facing something you never wanted.
And if we're honest, one of the unique challenges of living where we live, especially in Silicon Valley, is that we have just enough.
We have just enough privilege, just enough protection, and just enough resources to avoid certain kinds of suffering, or at least, delay it.
Most of us in this room do not have to contend with hunger or war the way most of the world does.
We don't have to contend with the instability the way most of the world does.
Not because we're better, just because of where we're born, what we've been given, what we've earned, and what we've had access to.
And look, I'm grateful for that.
I really am, but it also creates a subtle vulnerability in us.
We can become insulated from hardship in a way that leaves us unprepared for it because when you have enough resources, you can mitigate the effects of suffering.
Money can't buy happiness.
Everybody knows that, but if you've had enough of it, you also know this.
It can buy you options.
It can buy you time.
It can buy you treatment.
It can buy you a buffer.
And that buffer can trick us into thinking that we are in control, which means we can spend years, sometimes decades, building a life where the goal isn't formation, it's insulation.
And so I ask you again, but in a different way, what power does the fire you're facing have over you?
We become very good at protecting ourselves from discomfort, very good at managing risk, very good at avoiding the kinds of situation that exposes our limitations.
And then when something slips past that, when something threatens not just our comfort, but our control, we are stunned by how vulnerable we are.
And that's what this moment in Daniel is meant to signify.
Because for Shadrach, Meshach, and Abedne go, the installation's gone.
There is no contingency plan, no backup strategy.
There is only the furnace and the fury of the king.
And here we're about to see how God's presence transforms our peril.
Scripture tells us that Nebuchadnezzar's attitude changed towards him.
The same young men he had elevated, the same young men who had served faithfully are now the objects of his rage, and he orders the furnace heated seven times hotter than usual, which I don't even know how you do that when the thermometer hadn't been invented yet, but I guess when the king is angry, you don't ask questions.
Verse 22.
The king's command was so urgent and the furnace so hot that the flames of the fire killed the soldiers who took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
And these three men firmly tied, fell into the blazing furnace.
King Nebuchadnezzar leapt to his feet in amazement and asked his advisors, weren't there three men that we threw up and tied into that fire?
And they replied, certainly your majesty.
Look, he said, I see four men walking around in the fire, unbound and unharmed, and the fourth looks like a son of the gods.
I think it's worth noting here that the fourth figure in the fire only shows up after the fall.
God does not stop the furnace from being lit.
God does not prevent the accusation.
He doesn't calm the king's rage.
He does not intervene to help them go around the danger.
Instead, he joins them in it.
He gets close.
And the peril that was meant to destroy them becomes a very place where God's nearness is revealed.
Here's what stands out to me.
The promise of God's closeness is not a promise of avoidance.
It's a promise of accompaniment.
The diagnosis does not instantly reverse.
The market does not automatically rebound.
The relationship is not magically repaired overnight, but there's a presence in the middle of it that changes what the fire is allowed to do to us.
God's presence transforms our peril because it reminds us that we're not alone.
They were not alone that day, and neither are we.
What we are witnessing in Daniel chapter three is not just divine intervention, it is divine proximity.
The fourth figure does not appear outside the flames, but in them.
This is often depicted as an angelic cameo in art, but I actually believe it's just as the king said that the fourth looks like a son of the gods.
I believe that this is a pre-incarnational glimpse of Jesus himself, or as Phil said to us last week, a theophany.
What does that mean?
It's an appearance of Jesus before we knew who Jesus was.
the one who would one day step into our world has already stepped into the fire.
And if that's true, then this is not just an isolated miracle story.
It's a preview of the gospel.
It's the story of a God who does not remain insulated from our suffering, but enters into it with us.
When it comes to the fires that we face, we will never fully know the heart or mind of God this side of eternity.
There are questions that I carry that I do not have answers for.
There are prayers that I have prayed that have not been answered in the way that I wanted.
But what Scripture shows us time and time again is that God's presence is not ours.
Perspective is not ours.
His timeline is not ours.
His methods are not ours.
And his ultimate goal is not our insulation, but rather our formation.
Let me make this personal for a moment.
I have a Daniel in my life too.
He's my 12 year old son.
And as a special needs kid, he has a lot of challenges.
And when he suffers, we suffer.
And there are days that I can see anxiety all over him, uncertainty, uneasiness, and then a kind of internal shame because there are things that he feels deeply, but he cannot articulate them.
And so as a dad, I pray constantly that God would take those things away.
I pray for clarity, I pray for relief, I pray for hope that he will not fear the pressure or the peril of the furnace that he's facing.
And so we pray a very simple prayer together.
I could be calm, I could be brave,
Jesus is with me and I am okay.
And I've watched his countenance change, not always and not instantaneously, but I know that hope is growing.
I'm watching formation take shape inside of his soul, but there are still times that I struggle with prayers that I feel have gone unanswered.
And so here's how I've experienced God's presence in my peril.
I've come to recognize that I love my son for who he is, not for what he gives me.
I don't love him because he makes my life easier.
I love him because he's mine.
Why would we assume that God's love works any differently?
Do we love God for who he is or only for what he gives us?
If he blesses us, we praise him.
But if we withhold something, we question him.
If he delivers, we celebrate.
But if we, if he distances ourselves, we distance ourselves.
And I would just say is that how love works?
Is that how any relationship, functional relationship in your life works?
This is the words of Jesus from Mark chapter eight.
And calling the crowd to him with his disciples, he said to them, if anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me for whoever would save his life will lose it.
But forever loses his life for my sake and the sake of the gospel will save it.
For what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and forfeit his soul?
Jesus does not offer us a path for protection in this life.
In fact, He warns us that pursuing that could actually cost us our soul.
We aren't promised a life where we get to avoid the furnace, but we're invited to a life where we aren't ruled by the fear of it.
But in order to do that, we have to deny parts of ourselves.
And denying ourselves is not self-hatred or pretending like we don't have desires or dreams, it is the daily, intentional, formational refusal to make ourselves the center of the universe.
It is choosing surrender over control and trusting in the presence of God, even in peril, because we can't see the whole picture.
And the challenge is that we want God to cooperate with our desires.
We want His presence, but we also want our control.
We want Him close, but only if He moves in our direction.
We want miracles, but on our timeline.
We want blessings without surrender.
Really, every religion has the same path to salvation that sounds something like this.
Do the work, climb the ladder,
Follow the rules and you'll earn your outcome.
And if you do all of that work and suffering still comes to your doorstep, you will feel enraged.
You will feel cheated.
You will feel like God owes you.
Or you'll turn all of those feelings inward and assume that you failed somewhere along the line.
The furnace, that furnace, will destroy your soul.
When Jesus calls us to take up our cross, He's not asking us to pay for our sins.
He's inviting us into the freedom that comes from no longer trying to save ourselves.
Because when your life is centered on control, then every threat feels catastrophic.
But when your life is centered on surrender, then even suffering becomes sacred.
And that's what happened in Babylon.
The furnace that was meant to destroy them became an example of how God is with us.
So the king calls them out of the fire.
They were completely unharmed.
They were even honored because of this moment.
The only thing the fire did was burn their bonds.
Here's God's invitation to us today.
If we're willing to surrender our control and be defined by our faith, we too can embody a steady confidence, not a false assurance that bad things won't happen, not a defensive posture that demands answers for every unanswered prayer, just a quiet, rooted confirmation that says, I can be calm, I can be brave, Jesus is with me and I am okay.
Despite the brokenness and peril of this world, I believe that humans are wired for the presence of God and that to be near Him, especially in our pain, gives us life.
Throughout this series, we've been looking into different things and seeing a pattern unfold how God meets us in the desert.
God meets us in the fight.
And now we see how God meets us in the furnace.
But the stories in Scripture are not primarily about human strength or heroic faith, but about divine nearness.
But a God who refuses to remain distant from our reality and meets us where we are and as we are.
And when that presence settles into our lives, something unexpected begins to grow, not control, not certitude, but peace.
The kind of peace that comes from everything, not the kind of peace that works out from everything as we plan, but a true peace.
It's not a fragile peace that depends on our circumstances.
This is a peace.
that God gives and it is deeper.
It's the kind of peace that exists when the furnace is still burning.
This kind of peace is not the absence of peril, it's the presence of God.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were caught between the peril and the promise.
The king had condemned them, the fire was lit, they were bound, and everything about that moment screamed danger, and yet somehow they were not frantic, they did not bargain, they simply said, our God is able,
But even if he does not, we will not bow.
That's not reckless.
That's peace.
They understood something that we often forget.
That the greatest danger to the human soul is not suffering, but losing yourself in the suffering by forgetting who you are.
They had been taken captive into another kingdom, one that was trying to assimilate them and rename them and redefine them.
And in the moment that mattered most, they remembered who they were.
And this tension exists for us today.
We live in a world that pushes us to bow to whatever will give us safety or certainty, but underneath all of that is a quiet pressure to forget where our hope comes from.
Scripture reminds us that we are citizens of another kingdom, which means that our ultimate peace cannot come by the approval of this one.
Yes, we are called to seek the welfare of the city, to serve those around us, to work faithfully, to love generously, but do not confuse the empire with God because the fires will come through loss, through uncertainty, or through the slow burn of things that never quite resolved the way we thought they would.
And when those flames appear, they will either consume our hope or refine it.
I'll share one last thought with you.
Have you stopped to wonder
why there was a furnace there in the first place.
That furnace was actually not designed for punishment.
It was a hearth used for metalworking.
The furnace can be a metaphor for our suffering book.
It can also be the place where hope is forged, where the impurities of our illusions burn away and something stronger begins to take shape.
Fire is a way of deciding what will be consumed and what will be strengthened.
And so the question I post to you today is this, is your
theology, just theoretical, or do you actually believe that there's hope on the other side of surrender?
Because trust in God transcends the furnace.
It doesn't remove the heat, but it changes what it will produce.
And what was meant to destroy our faith could be the thing that purifies it.
So I invite you this week to take some inventory.
How are you facing the furnace in your life?
Are you facing it with control?
or with surrender.
I invite you this week, take time to nurture trust in prayer or in community.
Take time to reconnect with the one who made you and is with you in this world to remember where your hope is placed, that you will not be defined by the kingdom of this world.
But even when it tries to name you or assimilate you,
that you're not defined by the fires that you face, even when they feel overwhelming, you are defined by the God who steps into it with you, the God who gets close.
And when the pressures of this life bring you peril, I hope that you invite God's presence and you find peace.
Will you pray with me?
God, thank you for the examples in this life.
God, I thank you for the perils that we face
For those of us who are in the furnace right now and see no way out, see no means of escape God, I ask for your mercy.
I truly ask for it.
But more than anything else, I ask that we would know your presence, that we would feel your existence near us.
Would you give us the peace from trusting in you?
Would you give us the confidence to surrender what we need to surrender in order to be closer to you, and we can know that you are near.
Jesus name.
Amen.